Women’s Productive Capacity and Children’s Activities
Kaori Southall
DATA 150
Professor Tyler Frazier


de Hoop, J., Premand, P., Rosati, F., & Vakis, R. (2018). Women’s economic capacity and children’s human capital accumulation. Journal of Population Economics, 31(2), 453-481.
	The article by de Hoop, Premand, Rosati, and Vakis (2018) focuses on programs that attempt to alleviate poor women's economic capacity and their spillover effects on the children's school and work participation. The authors use a simple model to illustrate the possible pathways through which such programs impact the children's activities. The program was reviewed under the model intended to achieve two goals. First, the program is intended to enable income generation and expansion by stimulating women's economic activities. Secondly,  the program endeavored to encourage women empowerment by improving women's ambitions in household economic decisions and social participation. The article goes further to illustrate that the program focused on offering educational services on community organization and awarness, vocational training on entreprenueships and technical skills that will enhance the small and medium size entreprises, animal hubandry, crop cultivaion, capital transfers and follow up services.
  
	The authors in the article focus on addressing poverty and inequality. The article's ideas marry into the notion of development as propounded by  Sen (2001) human development is about expanding the citizen's capabilities. de Hoop, Premand, Rosati, and Vakis (2018) evaluate a program that attempts to alleviate women's economic capabilities in Nicaragua, focusing on how such programs have spillover effects on the children's human capital accumulation. Moreover, the article demonstrates the argument  advanced by Sen, stating, "Development consists of removing various types of unfreedoms that leave people with little choice and little opportunity to exercise their reasoned agency." Hence, through the provision of economic opportunities to remove barriers to such opportunities, women will improve themselves and impact their children. The author adds that all citizens' inclusive participation is the only guarantee to individuals' freedom since the individuals play the role of active agents of change instead of passive recipients of allotted benefits. Further, scholars agree on the need for social systems to provide opportunities to improve the population's well-being.  

Personal insights
The inclusion and empowerment of women in various economic and social activities cannot be overlooked. As demonstrated by the annotated articles, women enjoying developmental freedoms have spillover effects, especially on their children. For instance, whenever a mother has higher bargaining power, her children are less likely to spend more time in child labor (Reggio, 2011). Similarly, women enjoying the property and economic rights directly impact the enrollment and attendance of the girls in school (Geddes, Lueck, & Tennyson, 2012). Besides, programs that empower women and provide them with skills to help them fend and provide for their families in Nicaragua confirm that children from households that benefited from such programs are more likely to remain in school even after the program's conclusion. As demonstrated above, the greater the opportunities and freedoms enjoyed by women, the more the development witnessed.  

References
de Hoop, J., Premand, P., Rosati, F., & Vakis, R. (2018). Women’s economic capacity and children’s human capital accumulation. Journal of Population Economics, 453--481.
Sen, A. (2001). Development as freedom. Oxford.
